Hi, welcome back.
In this video, we will be turning our project
which used an in-memory database
into one using files for storage.
What we've got here is our database which is a list.
So, the first thing to do
is to start transitioning our database.py file
from using this list to store things
into using a file.
This is the reason
why I've structure the code the way
that I've structured it for you.
Now If we want to add a book,
we already know how to add a new line to a database,
or if we don't, we're going to learn in this video.
We already know how to read a file,
and get all it's contents.
We already know how to save into a file.
We already how to read a file,
and delete something and then save it again.
So, this database.py here,
is what's called an interface in programming.
An interface between our business logic,
what a programme is supposed to do, and the storage
which in this case would be a database, sorry a file,
and we're going to move on to database soon.
So, if we wanted to add book,
that would be very straight forward.
All we have to do is, well first of all
before we actually start writing any code,
let's change this to a CSV file,
and decide on the format of the CSV file
which I think should be named "author, read", like so.
Now that that's clear, we have decided that we're going
to store "name" then "author" then "read"
separated by commas, we can continue.
Notice that it could be beneficial
to separate it by hashes instead,
because the titles may have commas in them,
but for now we're not going to worry about that
you can make that change later on if you want.
So, to add a book, all we have to do is say
"with open books.txt" in "read mode as file",
and here, sorry "Write mode as file",
and here what we are going to do
is add a new book at the end,
I'm just going to delete this thing here.
However, I mentioned earlier on
when we started looking at files,
that "Write mode" would erase all contents of the file,
and then you would be able to start writing
from the very top the file.
We don't want to do this because our "add_book"
should add a new book probably at the end of the file.
We do want to keep the other books
that are already in the file,
otherwise we would only ever be able
to have one book at a time.
Instead of "w mode", we can use "a mode"
which stands for append.
So, anything we write will automatically go
to the very end of the file.
Because our file is going to have this structure,
and then it's going to have a "\n" at the end,
anything we write is always going to be
at the very bottom of the file.
Here's why, we're going to add a book,
and that's going to be in this format,
name, author, read, new line.
Then we'll add another one,
and because there's a new line it will go on the next line.
Then when we add another one it'll go on the next line,
and so forth.
So, it's important that we include that new line there,
because append mode will just go
to the very end of the file, the very last character,
which will be a new line.
So, all we have to do is "file.write name author",
and then we have to decide on how we are going
to store false values.
Because the text file we are going to be using
is not a python file, maybe "false" doesn't make much sense,
although it could, it's up to you,
but I'm going to store it as a zero,
zero for false, one for true,
it's up to you what you do.
And this is how we add a new book to "books.txt".
Notice though we still got our books variable up here.
We don't need that so, I'm going to rename it
into "books file" and this is going to be books.txt,
and this is going to be "books file".
That way, we're storing the file name up here,
that's essentially our database.
To get all books is going to be slightly more challenging.
Once again, I'm going to go here,
and have a couple of lines of "name, author, read",
just so it's a bit clearer what we're doing.
And the first thing we want to do is,
of course, open the file.
You know how to do this
with "open books file" and "read mode as file",
and now we want to get all the lines,
but we want to get the lines without the white space.
I hope you remember how to do this exactly,
using the strip method.
We are going to say lines is
"line.strip for line in file.readlines",
that's gonna read all the lines,
including the backslash n's,
and that's going to give us each one in a list,
in the element of the list,
and for each of the elements,
we're going to strip the white space
which is going to remove this here.
So, now we're going to have this as our contents
of this list here.
Now, we can also chain to it...
A split,
so that we will get...
one list... of lists.
Indeed, now our list will have this format...
Like so, so we'll have one list,
and inside it we'll have the sub list
where each one is going to be a list
of "name, author, read".
Now what we're going to do
is we're going to construct our book dictionaries.
So, this is going to be another list comprehension.
In the list, and notice by the way
you can put list comprehensions in multiple lines,
it's totally cool, totally fine.
Line 0...
"author" is going to be line one
and "read" is going to be line 2.
Of course, line doesn't exist
so, we're going to do "for line in lines",
and there we have it.
Remember, that each line,
or rather the whole lines list
has this format "name, author, and read",
"name, author, read"
So, "for line in lines" has given us one of these lists,
and then we're saying that "name"
is the zeroth element of this sub list which is a name,
"author" is the first element of this sub list
which is the author,
"read" is the third element of this sub list
which is the read status they have.
Then we can return books,
or indeed, if you want to save some space
because this variable here...
Is pretty redundant
we can just say return this list comprehension.
That's gonna execute the list comprehension first,
and then return it.
Okay, we got the get all books,
and the add book
now, we can move on to marking a book as read.
This not so easy
because although it's possible to go
into the file and modify it,
it's actually much easier to read the file in,
Modify the book that we want,
and then save them all to the file again.
That's actually much easier,
so we're going to go for that in this video.
The first thing to do is,
of course, to say "books" is "get all books"...
Okay.
For some reason it keeps saying...
Oh yeah, this thing here.
It kept saying this shadow is on the outer variable,
but I was pretty sure we deleted it,
so I was wondering what the hell that was.
But of course, the global books there was creating it again,
so we don't want to do that.
Anyway, marking book as read,
the first thing we want to do is get all the books,
then we want to iterate over them,
and well in fact, we already have it here.
For booking books,
if the books name is equal to the name that we passed in,
we're going to set it to read except now instead of true,
it's going to be one
because one means true and zero means false in our file,
and then at the end
we have to save all of the books that we've retrieved
back into the database,
and one of will have changed from zero to one.
So, for that I'm going to create another function
that I'm going to call "_save all books",
and I'm going to pass it the books that we read,
the books variable.
This function doesn't exist so we shall create it.
The reason why I'm calling it "_save all books" is
because in Python this tells other developers,
that they should not call this function.
You should only call this function from within this file.
This is normally known as a private function
in most programming languages.
Python doesn't have the concept of a private function,
so, other people form outside of the file
can still call this function if they want,
but the naming conventions in Python says that
if a function has a underscore in front,
you should probably not call it.
So, that's what we're doing here just calling it
with underscore first or naming it with an underscore first
so that other people know that
this is a function they probably shouldn't use,
they should only use "delete book", "mark book as read",
"get all books", and "add book".
So, in order to save all the books
well, we just have to open the file
in write mode this time,
and we're going to delete the entire file,
and rewrite it,
and we're going to go through each book,
and say "file write",
"book name",
"book author",
and "book read",
and at the end make sure to put the "/n"
that's pretty important as well.
Actually, I think we forgot to put it up here.
So, make sure to "file write", "/n" in there as well,
that's important.
I did say earlier it was really important
then I forgot.
There you have it,
so now, what we're doing in this function
is opening the file deleting all its contents
with the write mode, and then going through all of the books
in the list that we got as a parameter,
and for each book writing out it's details in csv format,
and a new line at the end,
so it's just going to re write our entire file.
Not the most efficient thing to be doing,
I'll be honest with you,
but it's much easier than going and modifying the file.
Okay, so now this "_save all books" function does exist,
so we're safe to use it there,
and again what we have done in this function
is read all the books,
going through them and modifying the one we want,
and then saved them all back,
and that is essentially the same thing we're
going to do for deleting a book.
So, I encourage you to,
now that I've implemented these two functions,
go and implement the delete book function on your own.
Once again, read all the books,
recreate the list without the book you want to delete,
and then save them all back.
Let's try that.
I hope you managed,
what I would do is once again say
"books" is "get all books".
Now, I'm going to say that books is actually
"book for book in books if" the book's name
is not equal to the name we got as a parameter
and finally save all books.
Notice how the function call here,
this function is above this function,
and I did say previously that you want functions
to be defined in the order in which they are used,
this is fine because this function was actually used above.
So, I think this is okay.
Again, we're using the list comprehension
to iterate over our books,
and then only put the book into a new list
if the book name matches
sorry, doesn't match.
So we're putting in all the books
except the one that is here,
and that's it.
We now have our "delete book", "mark book as read",
"get all books", and "add book" functions,
they are still the same functions as before,
the names are the same.
All they're doing now is they are storing things into a file
instead of into a list.
So, if we go over to app.py...
We actually don't have to change anything
because "database.add book" doesn't know
whether this is going into a list or a file,
and it doesn't care.
All it knows is that the book is being added.
Here in list books, "database.get all books"
will get the books,
you don't care where it's getting them from.
So, we have very well, decoupled our business logic,
our app from our database.
We have not done a perfect job
because the "book read" status is now going to be
Yes if the book is...
exactly equal to one otherwise no.
So, now instead of being true or false it's one or zero,
so that's the only thing there.
Okay, other than that,
"prompt read book" is going to get the name,
and then mark it as read,
and you know that in the background the database is going
to the file, opening it, looking through all the books,
marking one as read, saving them back,
but your app doesn't care.
So, what we have created here is a nice interface
between our app and our data storage mechanism,
that very nicely hides
all the complexity inside this file,
and this is as I said earlier normally called an interface,
and the interface here is to our database,
and the contents of the interface are these four functions.
The "add book", "get all books",
"mark book as read", and "delete book",
and normally we've been talking about user interfaces
because users have been interacting
with the menu that we've given them,
but this database is an API,
it's an application programing interface.
We've created an interface so that this part of the programme,
app.py, can interact with another part of the programme,
the database, via the interface that we've defined,
"prompt add book", "list books",
"prompt read book", and "prompt delete book".
So, if you think of app.py as a user,
these are the option that it can use
to interact with a database,
and it doesn't care what the implementation is,
whether it's a list or whether it's a file,
and indeed as we move forward
into databases as a sequel database,
as a relational database, it won't care either about that.
Let's run this app and try it out.
And by the way, I'm just going to stop that,
and this is annoying me a little bit,
we are going to add a space there.
Okay, let's run it.
We're going to add a new book,
we're going to enter "Clean Code" by Robert,
and as you can see no errors.
We're going to list all the books,
and we see "Clean Code" by Robert.
We can mark a book as read,
and that'll be "Clean Code",
then we can list them again,
and now it appears as read, we can delete a book,
and we can list them again, and nothing appears there,
and notice how books.txt has not appeared in PyCharm yet.
The file does exist,
if you go on your finder or on your window explorer programme,
into the directory in which this project is,
you will see the file is there,
but PyCharm doesn't quite update that quickly,
so it's not showing it there.
Okay, let's exit that programme,
notice how now the file is up here,
and let's delete the file.
Now, let's run the app again,
and now I'm going to read books.
What do you think is going to happen when I press Enter?
Well, let's see.
Oops, probably not what we wanted.
We probably wanted either nothing to print out,
or even nicer would be some sort of message saying
you don't have any books,
but instead we got a file not found error,
no such file directory "books.txt",
and the reason for that,
I'm just going to hide this away.
The reason for that is because when we add a new book,
or indeed, when we save all books,
we are using a constructive method of file opening.
So, we are crating the file here,
or we are creating the file here if it doesn't exist,
but the read method is not constructive,
it is more passive and it doesn't create the file
if it doesn't exists,
indeed, it gives you an error and it says file not found.
So, what we want to do is make sure the file exists
before we go and read it,
and for that I'm going to create one last function here
in our database interface,
and that's going to be,
"create book table"
and I'm consciously calling it "table"
even though it's a file
because this is called database,
and not called files,
and as we migrate over into a database,
this is going to be responsible
for creating the table that is going to store the books.
If you don't know what I'm talking about don't worry,
we are going to get there very soon.
So, all to do here is open it in write mode,
and you don't have to do anything with it,
It's going to close automatically
when you exit the context manager,
so you don't have to worry about anything,
and indeed, "as file" is optional
so you don't need it either
because you aren't going to use the variable for anything,
and again,
this just to make sure the file is there.
Okay, now we can rerun the app,
list our books...
Ah, of course my bad,
we created the method here, the function in the interface,
but we didn't actually call it.
So, at the top of the menu
before we ask the user for their input,
just type "database.create book table",
and that'll be all you need to do.
Now, we can list books and we don't get anything back.
Feel free, of course, to continue developing this programme,
and as you stop, and when you stop it
you get nice error there as well.
Feel free to add some more stuff to your programme.
What if there are no books?
Print something else out.
You know...
Add some more data to the book store.
You do whatever you want to do,
this is your programme now so,
congratulations on finishing this segment.
As we move on,
we're going to look at how to store this data as JSON,
and if you're interested in that,
just look at the next video.
If you're not really keen
on storing things in databases, in files any longer,
feel free to skip the next video,
move on the very following one,
where we're going to start looking at databases.
So, I'll see you either in the next video,
or in the one after that.
See you soon.